DAPR

Keeping Dapr (Distributed Application Runtime) enabled in an EKS (Elastic Kubernetes Service) cluster brings several key benefits for building and managing microservices-based applications. Let’s break it down simply:
🔍 What is Dapr?
Dapr is a portable, event-driven runtime that helps developers build resilient, stateless, and stateful microservices. It provides building blocks as sidecars (via containers), which your application can call over HTTP or gRPC.
✅ Benefits of Keeping Dapr Enabled in EKS
Simplifies Microservices Development

No need to manually implement retries, service discovery, pub/sub, etc.

Dapr provides reusable building blocks out-of-the-box.

Polyglot Support

You can write services in any language (Node.js, Python, Go, etc.) because Dapr communicates via HTTP/gRPC.

Built-in Observability

Tracing, metrics, and logs integrated with tools like Prometheus, Grafana, Zipkin, etc.

Resilient Communication

Automatic retries, timeouts, and circuit breakers for service-to-service calls.

State Management

Built-in state management with pluggable backends like Redis, CosmosDB, DynamoDB, etc.

Pub/Sub Messaging

Enables decoupled event-driven architectures with brokers like Kafka, Redis Streams, NATS, etc.

Secure Secret Management

Retrieve secrets securely using providers like AWS Secrets Manager, HashiCorp Vault, etc.

Simplified Kubernetes Integration

Dapr sidecars are automatically injected into your pods and managed alongside your services.

Portable Across Environments

Apps using Dapr can move from local dev to EKS (or any cloud) without code changes.

📌 Why Use Dapr?
Speeds up development: You don’t reinvent the wheel for cross-cutting concerns.

Reduces boilerplate: No need to add custom retry logic, circuit breaking, etc.

Enables best practices: Implements microservices patterns like stateful services, pub/sub, etc., the right way.

Cloud-agnostic: Helps avoid vendor lock-in, yet integrates deeply with cloud services (like AWS S3, DynamoDB, etc.)

⚙️ How is Dapr Helpful in Real Scenarios?

Scenario	How Dapr Helps
Service A calls Service B	Use Dapr’s service invocation with retries and tracing.
You need to store user session data	Use Dapr’s state management with Redis/DynamoDB.
You want async messaging between services	Use Dapr’s pub/sub system with Kafka or Redis Streams.
You need to get AWS secrets securely	Use Dapr’s secrets management with AWS Secrets Manager.
Want to log and monitor all calls	Built-in observability with OpenTelemetry integration.

🚀 In an EKS Cluster Specifically:
Sidecar Architecture: Dapr sidecars are deployed as containers alongside your app pods.

Scales With Your App: Follows Kubernetes autoscaling, high availability, etc.


package main

import (
    "log"
    "github.com/blushft/go-diagrams/diagram"
    "github.com/blushft/go-diagrams/nodes/generic"
)

func main() {
    d, err := diagram.New(diagram.Label("my-diagram"), diagram.Filename("diagram"))
    if err != nil {
        log.Fatal(err)
    }
    fw := generic.Network.Firewall().Label("fw")
    sw := generic.Network.Switch().Label("sw")
    d.Connect(fw, sw)
    if err := d.Render(); err != nil {
        log.Fatal(err)
    }
}


Native AWS Integration: Easily use Dapr with AWS services like S3, SQS, Secrets Manager.

Consistent Across Environments: Same code works on Minikube, local Docker, and EKS.

If we're running microservices in EKS, enabling Dapr helps you build faster, scale better, and maintain less custom infrastructure code.
